[WIP] Minimal ePBS without Max EB and 7002 (#2)
potuz/consensus-specs: specs/_features/epbs/beacon-chain.md

- [Beacon chain state transition function](#beacon-chain-state-transition-function)
  - [Block processing](#block-processing)
    - [Modified `process_withdrawals`](#modified-process_withdrawals)
    - [New `verify_execution_payload_header_signature`](#new-verify_execution_payload_header_signature)
    - [New `process_execution_payload_header`](#new-process_execution_payload_header)
    - [Modified `process_operations`](#modified-process_operations)
      - [Modified `process_attestation`](#modified-process_attestation)
      - [Payload Attestations](#payload-attestations)
    - [New `verify_execution_payload_envelope_signature`](#new-verify_execution_payload_envelope_signature)
    - [New `verify_inclusion_list_summary_signature`](#new-verify_inclusion_list_summary_signature)
    - [Modified `process_execution_payload`](#modified-process_execution_payload)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- /TOC -->

## Introduction

This is the beacon chain specification of the enshrined proposer builder separation feature. 

*Note:* This specification is built upon [Deneb](../../deneb/beacon-chain.md) and is under active development.

> This feature adds new staked consensus participants called *Builders* and new honest validators duties called *payload timeliness attestations*. The slot is divided in **four** intervals as opposed to the current three. Honest validators gather *signed bids* from builders and submit their consensus blocks (a `SignedBeaconBlock`) at the beginning of the slot. At the start of the second interval, honest validators submit attestations just as they do previous to this feature). At the  start of the third interval, aggregators aggregate these attestations (exactly as before this feature) and the honest builder reveals the full payload. At the start of the fourth interval, some honest validators selected to be members of the new **Payload Timeliness Committee** attest to the presence of the builder's payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature adds new staked consensus participants called *Builders* and new honest validators duties called *payload timeliness attestations*. The slot is divided in **four** intervals, one more added to the current three. Honest validators gather *signed bids* from builders and submit their consensus blocks (a `SignedBeaconBlock`) at the beginning of the slot. At the start of the second interval, honest validators submit attestations just as they do previous to this feature). At the  start of the third interval, aggregators aggregate these attestations (exactly as before this feature) and the honest builder reveals the full payload. At the start of the fourth interval, some honest validators selected to be members of the new **Payload Timeliness Committee** attest to the presence of the builder's payload.
```

At any given slot, the status of the blockchain's head may be either 

> - A block from a previous slot (eg. the current slot's proposer did not submit its block). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A block from a previous slot (e.g. the current slot's proposer did not submit its block). 
```

> - An *empty* block from the current slot (eg. the proposer submitted a timely block, but the builder did not reveal the payload on time). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An *empty* block from the current slot (e.g. the proposer submitted a timely block, but the builder did not reveal the payload on time). 
```

> - A full block for the current slot (both the proposer and the builder revealed on time). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A block with payload for the current slot (both the proposer and the builder revealed on time). 
```

Full can be confusing. Is the block full of transactions? Instead of empty or full, what about block with or without payload?

Author: Full is used throughout the whole list of long documents I worked on, changing this will be overkill for this stage of the project

## Constants

### Payload status

| Name | Value | 
| - | - | 
| `PAYLOAD_ABSENT` | `uint8(0)` |
| `PAYLOAD_PRESENT` | `uint8(1)` | 
| `PAYLOAD_WITHHELD` | `uint8(2)` | 

> | `PAYLOAD_INVALID_STATUS` | `uint8(3)` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `PAYLOAD_INVALID` | `uint8(3)` |
```

Author: Thanks for all the reading, I'll go over them and change the typos. I won't touch anything about naming cause there's always a lot of bikeshedding about that. I'll defer naming discussions until the very last moment when I am no longer involved

## Preset

### Misc

| Name | Value | 
| - | - | 

> | `PTC_SIZE` | `uint64(2**9)` (=512) # (New in ePBS) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_SIZE` | `uint64(2**9)` (=512) # (New in ePBS) |
```

### Domain types

| Name | Value |
| - | - |
| `DOMAIN_BEACON_BUILDER`     | `DomainType('0x1B000000')` # (New in ePBS)|

> | `DOMAIN_PTC_ATTESTER`       | `DomainType('0x0C000000')` # (New in ePBS)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `DOMAIN_PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_ATTESTER`       | `DomainType('0x0C000000')` # (New in ePBS)|
```

### Time parameters

| Name | Value | Unit | Duration |
| - | - | :-: | :-: |
| `MIN_SLOTS_FOR_INCLUSION_LISTS_REQUESTS` | `uint64(2)` | slots | 24 seconds # (New in ePBS) |

### Max operations per block

| Name | Value |
| - | - |
| `MAX_PAYLOAD_ATTESTATIONS` | `2**2` (= 4) # (New in ePBS) |

### Execution
| Name | Value | 
| - | - | 
| MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_INCLUSION_LIST | `2**10` (=1024) # (New in ePBS) | 

## Containers

### New containers

#### `PayloadAttestationData`

```python
class PayloadAttestationData(Container):
    beacon_block_root: Root
    slot: Slot
    payload_status: uint8
```

#### `PayloadAttestation`

```python
class PayloadAttestation(Container):

>     aggregation_bits: BitVector[PTC_SIZE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    aggregation_bits: BitVector[PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_SIZE]
```

    data: PayloadAttestationData
    signature: BLSSignature
```

#### `PayloadAttestationMessage`

```python
class PayloadAttestationMessage(Container):
    validator_index: ValidatorIndex
    data: PayloadAttestationData
    signature: BLSSignature
```

#### `IndexedPayloadAttestation`

```python
class IndexedPayloadAttestation(Container):

>     attesting_indices: List[ValidatorIndex, PTC_SIZE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    attesting_indices: List[ValidatorIndex, PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_SIZE]
```

```

### Modified containers

#### `BeaconBlockBody` 
**Note:** The Beacon Block body is modified to contain a Signed `ExecutionPayloadHeader`. The containers `BeaconBlock` and `SignedBeaconBlock` are modified indirectly.

```python
class BeaconBlockBody(Container):
    randao_reveal: BLSSignature
    eth1_data: Eth1Data  # Eth1 data vote
    graffiti: Bytes32  # Arbitrary data
    # Operations
    proposer_slashings: List[ProposerSlashing, MAX_PROPOSER_SLASHINGS]
    attester_slashings: List[AttesterSlashing, MAX_ATTESTER_SLASHINGS]
    attestations: List[Attestation, MAX_ATTESTATIONS]
    deposits: List[Deposit, MAX_DEPOSITS]
    voluntary_exits: List[SignedVoluntaryExit, MAX_VOLUNTARY_EXITS]
    sync_aggregate: SyncAggregate
    # Execution
    # Removed execution_payload [Removed in ePBS]
    # Removed blob_kzg_commitments [Removed in ePBS]
    bls_to_execution_changes: List[SignedBLSToExecutionChange, MAX_BLS_TO_EXECUTION_CHANGES]
    # PBS
    signed_execution_payload_header: SignedExecutionPayloadHeader  # [New in ePBS]
    payload_attestations: List[PayloadAttestation, MAX_PAYLOAD_ATTESTATIONS] # [New in ePBS]
```

#### `ExecutionPayload`

> **Note:** The `ExecutionPayload` is modified to contain a transaction inclusion list summary signed by the corresponding beacon block proposer 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The `ExecutionPayload` is modified to contain a transaction inclusion list summary signed by the corresponding beacon block proposer.
```

```python
class ExecutionPayload(Container):
    # Execution block header fields
    parent_hash: Hash32
    fee_recipient: ExecutionAddress  # 'beneficiary' in the yellow paper
    state_root: Bytes32
    receipts_root: Bytes32
    logs_bloom: ByteVector[BYTES_PER_LOGS_BLOOM]

>     prev_randao: Bytes32  # 'difficulty' in the yellow paper

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    prev_randao: Bytes32  # 'mix_hash' in the yellow paper
```

Author: has this changed in the YP and the main repo? I took this one out from the main repo

    block_number: uint64  # 'number' in the yellow paper
    gas_limit: uint64
    gas_used: uint64
    timestamp: uint64
    extra_data: ByteList[MAX_EXTRA_DATA_BYTES]
    base_fee_per_gas: uint256
    # Extra payload fields
    block_hash: Hash32  # Hash of execution block
    transactions: List[Transaction, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD]
    withdrawals: List[Withdrawal, MAX_WITHDRAWALS_PER_PAYLOAD]
    blob_gas_used: uint64
    excess_blob_gas: uint64
    inclusion_list_summary: List[ExecutionAddress, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_INCLUSION_LIST]# [New in ePBS]
```

#### `ExecutionPayloadHeader`

> **Note:** The `ExecutionPayloadHeader` is modified to only contain the block hash of the committed `ExecutionPayload` in addition to the builder's payment information and KZG commitments root to verify the inclusion proofs. 

Reviewer 2: one consideration of compression here by dropping other fields are if there are any apps/use cases are building/consuming proofs against the other attributes of payload against the inclusion in a block 

One way to make this easy would be to have a merkle hash of the execution payload ad the block hash here

(just thinking aloud)

```python
class ExecutionPayloadHeader(Container):
    parent_block_hash: Hash32
    parent_block_root: Root
    block_hash: Hash32
    builder_index: ValidatorIndex
    slot: Slot
    value: Gwei
    blob_kzg_commitments_root: Root
```

#### `BeaconState`

> *Note*: the beacon state is modified to store a signed latest execution payload header, and to track the last withdrawals honored in the CL. It is also modified to no longer store the full last execution payload header but rather only the last block hash and the last slot that was full, that is in which there were both consensus and execution blocks included. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: the beacon state is modified to store a signed latest execution payload header, and to track the last withdrawals honored in the CL. It is also modified to no longer store the full last execution payload header but rather only the last block hash and the last slot with payload, that is in which there were both consensus and execution blocks included. 
```

    current_epoch_participation: List[ParticipationFlags, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]
    # Finality
    justification_bits: Bitvector[JUSTIFICATION_BITS_LENGTH]  # Bit set for every recent justified epoch
    previous_justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    current_justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    finalized_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    # Inactivity
    inactivity_scores: List[uint64, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]
    # Sync
    current_sync_committee: SyncCommittee
    next_sync_committee: SyncCommittee
    # Execution
    # latest_execution_payload_header: ExecutionPayloadHeader # [Removed in ePBS]
    # Withdrawals
    next_withdrawal_index: WithdrawalIndex
    next_withdrawal_validator_index: ValidatorIndex
    # Deep history valid from Capella onwards
    historical_summaries: List[HistoricalSummary, HISTORICAL_ROOTS_LIMIT]
    # PBS
    previous_inclusion_list_proposer: ValidatorIndex # [New in ePBS]
    previous_inclusion_list_slot: Slot # [New in ePBS]
    latest_inclusion_list_proposer: ValidatorIndex # [New in ePBS]
    latest_inclusion_list_slot: Slot # [New in ePBS]
    latest_block_hash: Hash32 # [New in ePBS]

>     latest_full_slot: Slot # [New in ePBS]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    latest_slot_with_payload: Slot # [New in ePBS]
```

    execution_payload_header: ExecutionPayloadHeader # [New in ePBS]
    last_withdrawals_root: Root # [New in ePBS]
```

## Helper functions

### Math

#### `bit_floor`

```python
def bit_floor(n: uint64) -> uint64:
    """
    if ``n`` is not zero, returns the largest power of `2` that is not greater than `n`.
    """
    if n == 0:
        return 0
    return uint64(1) << (n.bit_length() - 1)
```
    
### Predicates

#### `is_valid_indexed_payload_attestation`

```python
def is_valid_indexed_payload_attestation(state: BeaconState, indexed_payload_attestation: IndexedPayloadAttestation) -> bool:
    """
    Check if ``indexed_payload_attestation`` is not empty, has sorted and unique indices and has a valid aggregate signature.
    """
    # Verify the data is valid

>     if indexed_payload_attestation.data.payload_status >= PAYLOAD_INVALID_STATUS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if indexed_payload_attestation.data.payload_status >= PAYLOAD_INVALID:
```

        return False

    # Verify indices are sorted and unique
    indices = indexed_payload_attestation.attesting_indices
    if len(indices) == 0 or not indices == sorted(set(indices)):
        return False
    # Verify aggregate signature
    pubkeys = [state.validators[i].pubkey for i in indices]

>     domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_PTC_ATTESTER, None)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_ATTESTER, None)
```

    signing_root = compute_signing_root(indexed_payload_attestation.data, domain)
    return bls.FastAggregateVerify(pubkeys, signing_root, indexed_payload_attestation.signature)
```

> #### `is_parent_block_full`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `is_parent_block_with_payload`
```

> This function returns true if the last committed payload header was fulfilled with a full payload, this can only happen when the parent block was full, that is both beacon block and payload were present. This function must be called on a beacon state before processing the execution payload header in the block. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function returns true if the last committed payload header was fulfilled with a payload, this can only happen when both beacon block and payload were present. This function must be called on a beacon state before processing the execution payload header in the block. 
```

```python

> def is_parent_block_full(state: BeaconState) -> bool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def is_parent_block_with_payload(state: BeaconState) -> bool:
```

    return state.execution_payload_header.block_hash == state.latest_block_hash
```

### Beacon State accessors

> #### `get_ptc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `get_payload_committee`
```

```python

> def get_ptc(state: BeaconState, slot: Slot) -> Vector[ValidatorIndex, PTC_SIZE]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def get_payload_committee(state: BeaconState, slot: Slot) -> Vector[ValidatorIndex, PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_SIZE]:
```

    """

>     Get the ptc committee for the given ``slot``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Get the payload committee for the given ``slot``
```

    """
    epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(slot)

>     committees_per_slot = bit_floor(min(get_committee_count_per_slot(state, epoch), PTC_SIZE))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    committees_per_slot = bit_floor(min(get_committee_count_per_slot(state, epoch), PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_SIZE))
```

>     members_per_committee = PTC_SIZE // committees_per_slot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    members_per_committee = PAYLOAD_COMMITTEE_SIZE // committees_per_slot
```

    
    validator_indices = [] 
    for idx in range(committees_per_slot):
        beacon_committee = get_beacon_committee(state, slot, idx)
        validator_indices += beacon_committee[:members_per_committee]
    return validator_indices
```

#### `get_payload_attesting_indices`

```python
def get_payload_attesting_indices(state: BeaconState, slot: Slot, 
                                  payload_attestation: PayloadAttestation) -> Set[ValidatorIndex]:
    """
    Return the set of attesting indices corresponding to ``payload_attestation``.
    """

>     ptc = get_ptc(state, slot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    payload_committee = get_payload_committee(state, slot)
```

>     return set(index for i, index in enumerate(ptc) if payload_attestation.aggregation_bits[i])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return set(index for i, index in enumerate(payload_committee) if payload_attestation.aggregation_bits[i])
```

The post-state corresponding to a pre-state `state` and a signed execution payload `signed_execution_payload` is defined as `process_execution_payload(state, signed_execution_payload)`. State transitions that trigger an unhandled exception (e.g. a failed `assert` or an out-of-range list access) are considered invalid. State transitions that cause a `uint64` overflow or underflow are also considered invalid. 

### Block processing

*Note*: the function `process_block` is modified to only process the consensus block. The full state-transition process is broken into separate functions, one to process a `BeaconBlock` and another to process a `SignedExecutionPayload`. Notice that withdrawals are now included in the beacon block, they are processed before the execution payload header as this header may affect validator balances.

```python
def process_block(state: BeaconState, block: BeaconBlock) -> None:
    process_block_header(state, block)

>     removed process_withdrawals(state) [Modified in ePBS]

Reviewer 3: `removed` ?

    process_execution_payload_header(state, block) # [Modified in ePBS, removed process_execution_payload]
    process_randao(state, block.body)
    process_eth1_data(state, block.body)
    process_operations(state, block.body)  # [Modified in ePBS]
    process_sync_aggregate(state, block.body.sync_aggregate)
```

#### Modified `process_withdrawals`
**Note:** This is modified to take only the `state` parameter. The payload is required to honor these withdrawals.

```python
def process_withdrawals(state: BeaconState) -> None:
    ## return early if the parent block was empty

>     if not is_parent_block_full(state):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if not is_parent_block_with_payload(state):
```

    signing_root = compute_signing_root(signed_header.message, get_domain(state, DOMAIN_BEACON_BUILDER))
    return bls.Verify(builder.pubkey, signing_root, signed_header.signature)
```

#### New `process_execution_payload_header`

```python
def process_execution_payload_header(state: BeaconState, block: BeaconBlock) -> None:
    # Verify the header signature
    signed_header = block.body.signed_execution_payload_header
    assert verify_execution_payload_header_signature(state, signed_header)

    # Check that the builder has funds to cover the bid
    header = signed_header.message
    builder_index = header.builder_index
    amount = header.value
    assert state.balances[builder_index] >= amount

    # Verify that the bid is for the current slot
    assert header.slot == block.slot
    # Verify that the bid is for the right parent block
    assert header.parent_block_hash == state.latest_block_hash
    assert header.parent_block_root == block.parent_root

    # Transfer the funds from the builder to the proposer
    decrease_balance(state, builder_index, amount)
    increase_balance(state, block.proposer_index, amount)

>     # Cache the inclusion list proposer if the parent block was full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Cache the inclusion list proposer if the parent block is with payload
```

>     if is_parent_block_full(state):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if is_parent_with_payload(state):
```

        state.latest_inclusion_list_proposer = block.proposer_index
        state.latest_inclusion_list_slot = block.slot
    # Cache the signed execution payload header 
    state.execution_payload_header = header
```

#### Modified `process_operations`

> **Note:** `process_operations` is modified to process PTC attestations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** `process_operations` is modified to process Payload Committee attestations
```

```python
def process_operations(state: BeaconState, body: BeaconBlockBody) -> None:
    # Verify that outstanding deposits are processed up to the maximum number of deposits
    assert len(body.deposits) == min(MAX_DEPOSITS, state.eth1_data.deposit_count - state.eth1_deposit_index)

    def for_ops(operations: Sequence[Any], fn: Callable[[BeaconState, Any], None]) -> None:
        for operation in operations:
            fn(state, operation)

    for_ops(body.proposer_slashings, process_proposer_slashing)
    for_ops(body.attester_slashings, process_attester_slashing)
    for_ops(body.attestations, process_attestation) # [Modified in ePBS]
    for_ops(body.deposits, process_deposit)
    for_ops(body.voluntary_exits, process_voluntary_exit)
    for_ops(body.bls_to_execution_changes, process_bls_to_execution_change)
    for_ops(body.payload_attestations, process_payload_attestation) # [New in ePBS]
```

##### Modified `process_attestation`

> *Note*: The function `process_attestation` is modified to ignore attestations from the ptc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: The function `process_attestation` is modified to ignore attestations from the payload committee.
```

```python
def process_attestation(state: BeaconState, attestation: Attestation) -> None:
    data = attestation.data
    assert data.target.epoch in (get_previous_epoch(state), get_current_epoch(state))
    assert data.target.epoch == compute_epoch_at_slot(data.slot)
    assert data.slot + MIN_ATTESTATION_INCLUSION_DELAY <= state.slot <= data.slot + SLOTS_PER_EPOCH
    assert data.index < get_committee_count_per_slot(state, data.target.epoch)

    committee = get_beacon_committee(state, data.slot, data.index)
    assert len(attestation.aggregation_bits) == len(committee)

    # Participation flag indices
    participation_flag_indices = get_attestation_participation_flag_indices(state, data, state.slot - data.slot)

    # Verify signature
    assert is_valid_indexed_attestation(state, get_indexed_attestation(state, attestation))

    # Update epoch participation flags
    if data.target.epoch == get_current_epoch(state):
        epoch_participation = state.current_epoch_participation
    else:
        epoch_participation = state.previous_epoch_participation

>     ptc = get_ptc(state, data.slot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    payload_committee = get_payload_committee(state, data.slot)
```

                proposer_reward_numerator += get_base_reward(state, index) * weight

    # Reward proposer
    proposer_reward_denominator = (WEIGHT_DENOMINATOR - PROPOSER_WEIGHT) * WEIGHT_DENOMINATOR // PROPOSER_WEIGHT
    proposer_reward = Gwei(proposer_reward_numerator // proposer_reward_denominator)
    increase_balance(state, get_beacon_proposer_index(state), proposer_reward)
```

##### Payload Attestations

```python
def remove_flag(flags: ParticipationFlags, flag_index: int) -> ParticipationFlags:
    flag = ParticipationFlags(2**flag_index)
    return flags & ~flag
``` 

```python
def process_payload_attestation(state: BeaconState, payload_attestation: PayloadAttestation) -> None:
    ## Check that the attestation is for the parent beacon block
    data = payload_attestation.data
    assert data.beacon_block_root == state.latest_block_header.parent_root
    ## Check that the attestation is for the previous slot
    assert data.slot + 1 == state.slot 

    #Verify signature
    indexed_payload_attestation = get_indexed_payload_attestation(state, data.slot, payload_attestation)
    assert is_valid_indexed_payload_attestation(state, indexed_payload_attestation)

>     ptc = get_ptc(state, data.slot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    payload_committee = get_payload_committee(state, data.slot)
```

    if state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0:
        epoch_participation = state.previous_epoch_participation
    else:
        epoch_participation = state.current_epoch_participation

    # Return early if the attestation is for the wrong payload status
    payload_was_present = data.slot == state.latest_full_slot
    voted_present = data.payload_status == PAYLOAD_PRESENT
    proposer_reward_denominator = (WEIGHT_DENOMINATOR - PROPOSER_WEIGHT) * WEIGHT_DENOMINATOR // PROPOSER_WEIGHT
    proposer_index = get_beacon_proposer_index(state)
    if voted_present != payload_was_present:

>         # Unset the flags in case they were set by an equivocating ptc attestation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Unset the flags in case they were set by an equivocating payload committee attestation
```
